-*- org -*-

* Mapa para bicis

** Propósito

Mapas para gente que va en bicicleta por los alrededores rurales de
Xalapa.

** Qué quieres ver en el mapa

Dar importancia a los caminos bicicleteables de tierra.

Muchos marcadores para saber dónde estás:  altares al lado del camino,
puentes, riachuelos, bardas/rejas, muros de contención.  Plantíos.
Construcciones aisladas y fáciles de identificar.  Cuerpos de agua.

Letreros en el camino, como el de "Rincón de Piedra".

¿Lugares de encharcamiento?

Lugares para aprovisionarse.  Changarros, tiendas, fondas.

Talleres de bicicletas en los pueblos.

Lugares de peligro.  Vías pavimentadas estrechas, curvas ciegas,
subidas ciegas.

Lugares con vistas bonitas.

Lugares para descansar - buena sombra.

Indicación de la pendiente del camino.

Curvas de nivel.

Calidad y superficie del camino.

** Referencias

http://ma.juii.net/blog/printable-osm-city-map

http://www.britishideas.com/2009/09/22/map-scales-and-printing-with-mapnik/

http://blog.systemed.net/post/10 - An ingenious German cycle map

http://blog.systemed.net/post/4 - The lost map scale 1:100,000

http://ugeographics.com/mulberry_river.html

https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/User:Frederik_Ramm/Freiburg_Map

http://www.transportparadise.co.uk/cyclemap/ - "quiet route",
"connecting quiet route", etc.

https://www.mapbox.com/blog/outdoors-design/

http://andyfiedler.com/blog/mapbox-studio-creation-osm-hiking-map-311/


* Letreros para el campo

** Postes de direcciones en los cruceros, a la europea

Foto en http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tag:information%3Dguidepost

** Letreritos en los puentes para indicar qué río cruzan

Ejemplos en http://www.gettingaroundgermany.info/zeichen2.shtml#info

* Blog post

Two of my current obsessions are related to each other:  bicycling
on the rural roads around Xalapa, and mapping them in OpenStreetMap.

Bicycling is the fun, visceral, right-brain part.  We have absolutely
wonderful terrain here; Xalapa is on a mountainside, it is part of a
cloud forest, and there are coffee plantations all over the place.

Mapping is the left-brain, meticulous part.  A common exercise among
local cyclists is to load up Google Earth and browse around to find
interesting rural roads.  However, not all of them are shown on the
map, and if they happen to be surrounded by trees, they will be hard
to make out on the satellite view.

I've been populating OpenStreetMap with our rural roads and paths
among the plantations.  Some are easy to make out on the satellite
view; others really require one to go about with a GPS and record a
track to trace later into the map.  Along the way I've been locating
useful landmarks like buildings, isolated houses, small bodies of
water, small bridges over creeks, and the ubiquitous wayside shrines
that people build here.  This has proved to be an interesting process.

Some days I'll do a two or three-hour ride with a specific route in
mind:  "explore the rural road that starts by that bus stop along the
highway", or "explore the interesting-looking path that starts where
Google Street View reaches its limit".  I'll turn on a GPS recorder
on my phone and get going.  I have an offline editor for
OpenStreetMap on my phone, so if I run into an interesting landmark,
I'll be able to notate its position right there.

There are some convoluted paths around here, and without a GPS it is
hard to know exactly where one is since one is frequently surrounded
by trees or sugarcane fields.  I've gotten lost a couple of times,
but fortunately the GPS told me where I was *and* my mapping app had
saved a few tiles of the satellite view for offline use.

(Protip: exploring downhill is perilous; as you get tired you'll have
a harder time going back uphill.  Especially when the path ends and
your only way out is to carry the bike on your shoulder across an
muddy/unridable coffee plantation.)

One thing I want to do is to make a nice printed map, the kind that
you would carry with you on a bike.  I've been learning Mapbox Studio
as a way to style a map out of OpenStreetMap data and make it
suitable for printing.  The learning curve is rather steep, but the
process is interesting.

